# Automathirds
This is what I call the Automathirds. The idea for this instrument is to map out the x and y axis of a life-like cellular automaton grid to pitches. To quickly go over what life-like cellular automata are, they are a grid of cells in which cells are born, survive, and die in the following generation based on the status of its eight surrounding cells. The conditions for cells to be born, survive, or die are iterations of the original “life” by John Conway. By specifying which cells are alive, one could observe how the ruleset evolves over generations.

Sonifying cellular automata isn’t anything new. There are countless interpretations of what sonifying a cellular automata would look like. So now that we’ve established that this isn’t entirely original, what original things can I do with my interpretation?

Every now and then, I like to put on some ambient music: Aphex Twin, Autechre, etc. I thought the visual of the automaton could be perfectly paired with ambient music. So at this point, I’m thinking, Chords. I want to play chords. So I decided on mapping out pitches to x and y. Now I want to be able to play all the notes of a diatonic scale. But If you play all the white keys in an octave, they’ll sound quite dissonant. Instead of mapping out a diatonic scale to the cells, how about space them in thirds? That’s how extended chords are built. So the X axis is mapped in thirds, hence the name. For the Y axis I decided on mapping out the overtones series onto it in the spirit of additive synthesis. Each cell thus has a unique pitch assigned to them. The root note of the chord lies in cell 1,1 and can be determined using midi keyboard note values. Each cell has a sine wave oscillator and its on/off status acts as envelope triggers.  

Interaction with the automaton is as simple as clicking on any point in the grid to give it life. Like most interfaces you see online of these automata, you could also click on a cell at any point whether it’s progressing through generations or being paused. Additionally, you could also hold your left mouse button and drag across the automata to give cells life, or alternatively hold shift, left click and drag to kill cells. So rather than being a zero player game where you select which cells to give life to, hit play and watch, the user interface facilitates a sort of collaboration with the automata. 

Why a cellular automaton? Personally it’s very mesmerizing to watch. To see how a grid reacts to your input is very satisfying to me. Drawing constructs and seeing them evolve is very fun. It’s almost like playing god as you give life as you please and see your world evolve. Since the visual aspect is a large part of the instrument, I decided to spend time making the GUI satisfying to use and watch. The envelope of oscillators are also visually represented by the LEDs. The knobs and master volume indicates when it is being clicked on and changed.

In the future, I would like to figure out how to make chord changes more smooth and less abrupt. Additionally, I would like to implement a rhythmic element to the updates where maybe you can specify the rhythm of the updates in a 16 step sequencer style interface. I would also like to implement the option to toggle toroidal boundaries so that gliders could move infinitely.
